Updated security considerations (#55)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-voprf: draft-irtf-cfrg-voprf.md

place. Then V verifies that P has used k in the protocol using this commitment.
In the following, we may also refer to this commitment as a public key.

## Computational hardness assumptions

We give a selection of hardness assumptions that are related to the construction
of the (V)OPRF protocols.

Each assumption states that the problems specified below are computationally
difficult to solve in relation to sp (the security parameter). In other words,
the probability that an adversary has in solving the problem is bounded by a
function negl(sp), where negl(sp) < 1/f(sp) for all polynomial functions f().

Let GG = GG(sp) be a group with prime-order p, and let FFp be the finite field
of order p.

### Discrete-log (DL) problem {#dl}

Given G, a generator of GG, and H = h*G for some h in FFp; output h.

### Decisional Diffie-Hellman (DDH) problem {#ddh}

Sample a uniformly random bit d in {0,1}. Given (G, a*G, b*G, C), where:

- G is a generator of GG;
- a,b are elements of FFp;

> - if d==0: C = ab*G; else: C is sampled uniformly GG(sp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if d == 0: C = ab*G; else: C is sampled uniformly GG(sp).
```

Output d' == d.

# OPRF Protocol {#protocol}

In this section we describe the OPRF and VOPRF protocols. Our OPRF construction
is based on the VOPRF construction known as 2HashDH-NIZK given by {{JKK14}};
essentially without providing zero-knowledge proofs that verify that the output
is correct. Our VOPRF construction (including the NIZK DLEQ proofs from
{{dleq}}) is identical to the {{JKK14}} construction. With batched proofs
({{batch}}) our construction differs slightly in that we can perform multiple
VOPRF evaluations in one go, whilst only constructing one NIZK proof object.

## Design

Let GG be an additive group of prime-order p, let GF(p) be the Galois field
defined by the integers modulo p. Define distinct hash functions H_1 and H_2,
where H_1 maps arbitrary input onto GG and H_2 maps arbitrary input to a
fixed-length output, e.g., SHA256. All hash functions in the protocol are
modelled as random oracles. Let L be the security parameter. Let k be the

> prover's (P) secret key, and Y = kG be its corresponding 'public key' for some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prover's (P) secret key, and Y = k*G be its corresponding 'public key' for some
```

As aforementioned, our OPRF and VOPRF constructions are based heavily on the
2HashDH-NIZK construction given in {{JKK14}}, except for considerations on how
we instantiate the NIZK DLEQ proof system. This means that the cryptographic
security of our construction is also based on the assumption that the One-More
Gap DH is computationally difficult to solve.

The (N,Q)-One-More Gap DH (OMDH) problem asks the following.

~~~
    Given:
    - G, kG, G_1, ... , G_N where G, G1, ... GN are elements of the group GG;
    - oracle access to an OPRF functionality using the key k;
    - oracle access to DDH solvers.

    Find Q+1 pairs of the form below:

    (G_{j_s}, kG_{j_s})

    where the following conditions hold:
      - s is a number between 1 and Q+1;
      - j_s is a number between 1 and N for each s;
      - Q is the number of allowed queries.
~~~

The original paper {{JKK14}} gives a security proof that the 2HashDH-NIZK
construction satisfies the security guarantees of a VOPRF protocol
{{properties}} under the OMDH assumption in the universal composability (UC)
security model. Without the NIZK proof system, the protocol instantiates an OPRF

> protocol only. We defer the interested reader to the paper for further details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protocol only. See the paper for further details.
```

efficient way of instantiating the OPRF. Our instantiation includes
considerations for providing the DLEQ proofs that make the instantiation a
VOPRF. Supporting OPRF operations (ECOPRF) alone can be allowed by simply
dropping the relevant components. For reasons that are detailed in
{{cryptanalysis}}, we only consider ciphersuites that provide strictly greater
than 128 bits of security {{NIST}}.

## VOPRF-curve448-HKDF-SHA512-ELL2:

- GG: curve448 {{RFC7748}}
- H_1: curve448-SHA512-ELL2-RO {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve}}
  - label: voprf_h2c
- H_2: SHA512
- H_3: SHA512
- H_4: SHA512
- H_5: HKDF-Expand-SHA512

## VOPRF-p384-HKDF-SHA512-ICART:

- GG: secp384r1 {{SEC2}}
- H_1: P384-SHA512-ICART-RO {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve}}
  - label: voprf_h2c
- H_2: SHA512
- H_3: SHA512
- H_4: SHA512
- H_5: HKDF-Expand-SHA512

## VOPRF-p521-HKDF-SHA512-SSWU:

- GG: secp521r1 {{SEC2}}
- H_1: P521-SHA512-SSWU-RO {{I-D.irtf-cfrg-hash-to-curve}}
  - label: voprf_h2c
- H_2: SHA512
- H_3: SHA512
- H_4: SHA512
- H_5: HKDF-Expand-SHA512

We remark that the 'label' field is necessary for domain separation of the
hash-to-curve functionality.

# Security Considerations {#sec}

> We discuss the implications around using an OPRF, along with some suggestions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section discusses OPRF usage implications, along with some suggestions
```

and trade-offs that arise from their usage.

## Cryptographic security {#cryptanalysis}

> As we mentioned previously, the hardness of our (V)OPRF protocol depends on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously, the hardness of our (V)OPRF protocol depends on the
```

(N,Q)-OMDH assumption {{protocol-sec}}, where N is the number of group elements
received and Q is the number of adversarial queries. The original 2HashDH-NIZK
construction in {{JKK14}} comes with a security proof in the UC security model
under this assumption.

### Q-strong-DH oracle {#qsdh}

A side-effect of this assumption is that it allows instantiation of a oracle for
constructing Q-strong-DH (Q-sDH) samples. The Q-Strong-DH problem asks the
following.

~~~
    Given G1, G2, h*G2, (h^2)*G2, ..., (h^Q)*G2; for G1 and G2 generators of GG.

    Output ( (1/(k+c))*G1, c ) where c is an element of FFp
~~~

The assumption that this problem is hard was first introduced in {{BB04}}. Since
then, there have been a number of cryptanalytic studies that have reduced the
security of the assumption below that implied by the group instantiation

> (for example, {{BG04}} and {{Cheon06}}). In summary, the attacks reduce the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(for example, {{BG04}} and {{Cheon06}}). In summary, known attacks reduce the
```

fact instantiate an OPRF with 128-log_2(Q) bits of security.

While it would require an informed and persistent attacker to launch a highly
expensive attack to reduce security to anything much below 100 bits of security,
we see this possbility as something that may result in problems in the future.
Therefore, all of our ciphersuites in {{ciphersuites}} come with a minimum group
instantiation corresponding to 196 bits of security. This would require an
adversary to launch a minimum of Q = 2^(68) queries to reduce security to 128
bits using the Q-sDH attacks. As a result, it appears prohibitively expensive to
launch credible attacks on these parameters with our current understanding of
the attack surface.

## Hashing to curve

A critical aspect of implementing this protocol using elliptic curve group
instantiations is a method of instantiating the function H1, that maps inputs to
group elements. In the elliptic curve setting, this must be a deterministic
function that maps arbitrary inputs x (as bytes) to uniformly chosen points in
the curve.

In the security proof of the construction H1 is modelled as a random oracle.

> This implies that any instantiation of H1 must e pre-image and collision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This implies that any instantiation of H1 must be pre-image and collision
```

reveal their OPRF input afterwards, then the server should be link the revealed
input to a protocol instantiation with probability 1/pp.

Below, we provide a few techniques that could be used to abuse client-privacy in
the OPRF construction by segregating the user-base, along with some mitigations.

### Linkage patterns

If the server is able to ascertain patterns of usage for some clients -- such as
timings associated with usage -- then the effective privacy of the clients is
reduced to the number of users that fit each usage pattern. Along with early
registration patterns, where early adopters initially have less privacy due to
a low number of registered users, such problems are inherent to any
anonymity-preserving system.

### Evaluation on multiple keys {#multiple-keys}

Such an attack consists of the server evaluating the OPRF on multiple different
keys related to the number of clients that use the functionality. As an extreme,
the server could evaluate the OPRF with a different key for each client. If the
client then revealed their hidden information at a later date then the server
would immediately know which initial request they launched.

> The attacks highlighted above are prevented in the VOPRF case using the NIZK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VOPRF variant helps mitigate this attack since each server evaluation can be bound to a known public key. However,
```

> DLEQ proofs that link each server evaluation to a known public key. However,

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

there are still ways that the VOPRF construction can be abused. In particular:

- If the server successfully provisions a large number of keys that are trusted
  by clients, then the server can divide the user-base by the number of keys
  that are currently in use. As such, clients should only trust a small number

>   (2 or 3 ideally) of server keys at any one time.

Reviewer: Could we mention some form of key transparency as a mitigation here, too?

Author: Yeah I can add this in.

  rotating the server key (for protecting against malicious clients) that we
  address more closely in {{key-rotation}}.

Since key provisioning requires careful handling, all public keys should be
accessible from a client-trusted registry with a way of auditing the history of
key updates. We also recommend that public keys have a corresponding expiry date
that clients can use to prevent the server from using keys that have been
provisioned for a long period of time.

## Key rotation {#key-rotation}

Since the server's key is critical to security, the longer it is exposed by
performing (V)OPRF operations on client inputs, the longer it is possible that
the key can be compromised. For instance, if the key is kept in production for a
long period of time, then this may grant the client the ability to hoard large
numbers of tokens. This has negative impacts for some of the applications that
we consider in {{apps}}. As another example, if the key is kept in circulation
for a long period of time, then it also allows the clients to make enough
queries to launch more powerful variants of the Q-sDH attacks from {{qsdh}}.

> To combat attacks of this nature, we argue that fairly regular key rotation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To combat attacks of this nature, regular key rotation
```

should be employed on the server-side. A suitable key-cycle for a key used to

> compute (V)OPRF evaluations would be between one and three months.

Reviewer: I wouldn't call this "fairly regular" -- maybe we can make it on the order of days or weeks, like TLS STEKs?

Author: Days seem too short. We could possibly go to 1 week, but I think this is highly dependent on the number of users as well?

As we discussed in {{multiple-keys}}, key rotation cycles that are too frequent
(<< 1 month) can lead to large segregation of the wider user base. As such, the
length of the key cycles represent a trade-off between greater server key
security (for shorter cycles), and better client privacy (for longer cycles). In

> situations where client privacy is paramount, then longer key cycles should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
situations where client privacy is paramount, longer key cycles should be
```

> employed.

Reviewer: As above, I think some form of transparency might help achieve high update frequencies without compromising client privacy.

Author: I'll mention key transparency, but I still think that high update frequencies are going to be a problem? Key transparency just allows the client to check that the server is not mis-behaving right?
